Okay, now let's come back to
that performance question.
I'm sorry were there questions?
>> When you using I mean with any
function with especially with, with,
with recursive functions.
Do you need to have more that your
base cases if somebody were to
provide a negative number, would you
need something to check for that?
>> Great question.
What about error handling?
What about, if somebody passes
a maybe a negative number or
a mad they could pass a string or
some other thing?
That's not right.
And I have not handled that.
And these are reference implementations
of sort of assuming that we're
getting the right kind of value coming in,
and this is maybe,
opens up another can of worms that
we're not gonna talk about today.
But something else that goes hand in
hand with functional programming a lot
is types, strongly typed data, so
data where we have a guarantee in
the way the function is declared that it
will only take in, a certain type of data.
And sometimes, maybe that's a type of data
that could be one of several types, or
sometimes it's, really restrictive,
it has to be a positive integer, or
something like that.
And so a lot of the times in functional
programming, you will see types.
Used to kind of guarantee that that
determinism because I'm not going
to get an error because I,
I tried to add to, I don't know custom
objects together that don't work
with the plus operator, or, or
because I'm not handling a particular case
a negative number or something like that.
So a lot of the times you will see in
functional, free or functional languages
like Haskell, let's say you will see
types used as a way of doing that.
And also you will see in JavaScript,
a lot of folks that like to write code in
a functional style using some of these
more typed versions like type script to
help them not worry about that and
have that guarantee going in that whatever
we're operating on, we know exactly
what it's going to look like.
And the the language or the type system
is gonna kind of figure that out for
us but in the absence of that in
a vanilla JavaScript framework
like this where we don't
have strongly typed data and
n could really be anything and
JavaScript doesn't care.
It could be undefined,
it could be whatever.
We would wanna handle that the same
way we would in any JavaScript code.
Great question.
Okay, so now, the question of
performance came up a lot before or
a couple of times before.
What are the performance considerations?
Is recursion and iteration,
do they give the same performance?
Will there be any problems?
So did folks have fun trying
to break their notebooks here
with the different inputs
to these functions.
I saw somebody had somebody
had fun crashing their,
notebook I think, sorry there is
a small bug here but yes okay.
So if we use,
let's say we just change the values here.
So, the iterative one, 40 seems to work 50
seems to work okay, let's try recursive.
So four seems to work.
14 seems to work 20 seems to work 40,
it's real slow, it's real slow.
It worked, but it was real slow.
But if I were to go up to something
like 100 and what was it?
104, it's thinking, it's thinking, it's
thinking, it's thinking, it's thinking.
It's still thinking.
It's taking it a very long time.
Okay, well while we're talking about this,
clearly we can see that the iterative
of Fibonacci one did not seem to be
struggling as much as
the recursive Fibonacci one.
Anybody have ideas about what is going on
here with this performance difference?
>> The recursive function is
calculating the values again and again.
For 40 it will calculate.
I mean it's a recursive tree right.
So it will calculate 14 many times and
under those 40
values it will calculate 20 many times and
10 many times and
also like each recursion is I mean,
it calls a new function on the stack.
So it also wastes memory.
>> Okay, so I heard a couple of things.
So we have on the one hand
we have that this recursive
function here is actually
making two recursive calls.
So it's doing a lot of work.
And it's going to be making the same call.
So it's going to make let's say it's a,
we pass in four.
It's going to call recursive Fibonacci on
two and then recursive Fibonacci on three.
And then when we call it on three,
it's going to call it again on one and
then again on two.
So we've got kind of like multiple times
that we're making the same call with
the same arguments.
So that's one issue.
And then the other thing that was
mentioned was the call stack.
So you may have seen a minute
ago we had something called
a too much recursion error or
an internal error.
And I think I'm going to need to, so
FYI folks if you ever get into a sticky
situation like this in observable.
You can reload the page with
what's called Safe Mode.
So if I put safe on the end of this and
I reload the page,
I will get a version of my notebook.
That allows me to see just the code, it's
not going to actually run any of it so
that I can fix something that
might crash or hang the page.
And so in this case, I'm just gonna,
put this value back down.
To four so that we're not
crashing the page anymore so
that we can talk about it and
then I'm gonna reload not in safe mode and
now things work again.
Okay, great.
But we did see we saw it was
really struggling, right.
And so,
[COUGH] We may have seen earlier a,
too much recursion error.
Let me see if I can get it to do it again.
So you may have seen something like
this internal error too much recursion.
This is the message you'll get.
I'm in Firefox right now, you might see
call stack size exceeded in some other
browsers, or
Stack Overflow might be another message.
So this is another problem
that we're running into,
which is a tricky thing for
recursion as well.
So to recap,
we've got two problems with recursion.
One is that in a function like recursive
Fibonacci where I've got this double
recursive call here, I, I'm kind of
doing work multiple times doing the same
work multiple times and one solution to
that that we're not going to get into but
you might want to look up on your
own is something called memoization.
So memoization is a sort of way of
caching the results of those functions.
So that when I call recursive
Fibonacci of two, twice,
once in the first recursive call, and
then in the second one,
I don't have to repeat the computation,
I can actually just use the value
from the first time I called it.
So if you're curious about how that works,
you can look up Memoization
in recursive functions.
And then the other problem we saw was
this too much recursion or Stack Overflow
error, which is because every time I call
a function in JavaScript and it mostly.
Languages, I have to add a new frame for
that exact call of
the function to what's called
the functions to the call stack.
And the call stack is on my computer and
my computer has a finite amount of memory.
So we're trying to do a operation
recursion which could
theoretically go on forever.
There's nothing conceptually or
mathematically preventing that recursion
from going, going, going, going,
going, going, going, going going,
however, we're doing that potentially
infinite operation in a finite resource
environment, so how does that work?
So we keep adding frames to the stack.
And eventually if I have a really, really
deep recursion because I've got a big
input number or I've got a large array
I'm operating on or something like that.
I'm gonna run out of room and so I'm gonna
get this error call stack size exceeded or
too much recursion or
whatever my browser tells me.
The solution to that or a solution to that
is something called tail recursion and
tail call optimization.
Now we're not gonna get into
the details of how that works,
but TLDR the quick version is
that tail call optimization is
a feature of some runtimes
like my JavaScript engine,
where it can perform an optimization
on my recursive code.
If, if Importantly, I write that
recursive code in a particular way.
So instead of writing
a regular recursive function,
I write something that's called
a tail recursive function.
Now again, we're not going to talk about
exactly what that means, but a year or
so ago, my friend Natalia Margolis, and
I wrote a musical tech talk about it.
So if you're bored one day and
want to learn through song how tail call
optimization works,
you can check out that video.
Or you can look it up for
yourself in JavaScript.
In es six or es 2015.
JavaScript introduced a feature
called Proper tail calls that
allows you to in certain engines,
like Safari, for example,
you can take advantage of this
tail call optimization thanks to
the language feature proper tail
calls that was added in ES6.
So those are some terms you can look up
if you want to read more about how to get
around these performance issues,
and in functional languages,
you would see that kind of thing
often built into the language so
that you don't have to worry about it.
You don't have to jump
through hoops with it.
But in JavaScript because
it's a multipurpose language,
we have to think a little bit
more deliberately about it.
And in fact,
JavaScript itself had to change in order
to make those work around as possible.
So, that is I will leave you with and
answer to some of the questions that came
up earlier about,
what about the performance?
Aren't we gonna blow the call stack?
Yes, yes, these are concerns for
functional programming
there are workarounds.
But honestly, this was a huge problem for
the functional programming
community to solve.
It took a really long time to figure
out how to combine this recursive way
of thinking about solving problems and
this pure functional mindset.
With the constraints of working on
a computer architecture that is just
limited in its resources.
So that was one of the reasons that
functional programming kind of took
a long time to develop and kind of hit
the mainstream of software development.
So these are some really interesting
things to dig into, in my opinion,
once you start learning about like,
what are the implications of
working with functional code.
What does that mean for everything that
has to change in our way that we even
think about computing on
a processor like this.
So I hope you all will have a lot of
fun after this course digging into some
of the resources that I'm going to
leave you with at the end of the day.
To find out more.
Okay, so the question is,
is tail call optimization
a feature of JavaScript engines?
Yes, it is something that you as
a programmer can't implement the language
itself has to implement it.
And so then the second part of
the question is do all JavaScript engines
support it?
Do all JavaScript engines have this
implemented the answer to that is No.
For example, I am in,
in Firefox right now,
which does not implement
tail call optimization.
So, even if I write my code in a way that
could work with tail call optimization,
if I run this code in Firefox,
we won't see it work.
But if I run it in Safari, Safari does
implement tail call optimization.
So we would be able to
take advantage of that.
If I write my code the right way,
I would be able to take advantage
of that in Safari node and V eight.
So V eight the engine that
powers chrome and node.
V eight did implement it.
In a few years back in the version
that was accessible through node six,
it was behind a feature flag.
You could use the harmony feature flag,
but there are some.
Drawbacks to doing tail call optimization,
which we'll get into a little bit in
the talk that I linked and which you'll
also find out if you read more about some
of the resources that I've linked in
some of the terms that I mentioned
that you can go Google or DuckDuckGo or
use your search engine of choice.
Suffice it to say that when
you do tail call optimization,
you're messing with the call stack.
You're messing with the, engines history,
of what has been what is being called.
And so one problem for example,
is that then, if you're trying to.
Trying to debug that, or
if you're trying to debug,
exactly where in the call stack,
something went wrong.
That introduces complications because
you're kind of like rewriting history
a little bit.
In any case,
this is a reason why those features in
VA never really hit the mainstream.
So we don't have tail call
optimization in Chrome.
We don't have tail call optimization
in the latest versions of node.
So Safari WebKit engine is is
the the safari engine is the only
browser engine that I'm aware
of that actually implements this